---
title: The plow and the pen
category: philosophy
date: 07/03/2014
description: A short essay about how agriculture and writing were our more important cooperation and communication technological discoveries

In history, we can find dozens, maybe hundred, of inventions and discoveries that changed the humankind, modeled it as we know today. It's hard to choose which ones were the more important but I'll do my bet for agriculture and writing.

My criteria to define the importance of an invention are the velocity to appear his consequences. The fire was discovered maybe 790,000 years ago and it was fundamental for the surviving of the homo sapiens: light, warm, cook and defense. But we have to wait until 10,000 years ago to see the development of agriculture and then we have to wait another 5,000 years to see the end of prehistory with the appearance of the cuneiform writing.

Look at the distance between the fire and the agriculture, the following great development. And compare it with the distance between agriculture and the writing. Hundred of thousands of years versus thousands. This measure of distance between developments show us the impact in humankind.

It's not clear how agriculture appears. There are speculations that the arrival of warmer weathers allowed it but there aren't sure explanations about how this practices we're incorporated and how they finally give birth to civilization as Egypt. 

Why was so important the agriculture? The agriculture changed the man since the moment it left the harsh survival conditions of the paleolithic man who depends on the hunt and recollection. It's the beginning of all the greatest civilizations. The agriculture allows the accumulation of food and the need to stay in a place. The nomadic order was cooperative as any order need to be in certain degree but the first agriculture settlements require a higher level of cooperation. Starting with the idea of a some kind of private or public land property where the villager farm and the fact that the accumulation of food would bring other kind of wealth and also attract enemies requires an order based on some kind of agreement between the villagers.

The accumulation of food as we know free some of them of the hard work of gathering food leaving idle population free to produce other ways of wealth. Soldiers, priests, kings, nobility and all none working occupation can only exist with a continuous surplus of food and basic products. This occupation has functions like war, law, taxes, muster, diplomacy and even research. The last one was a result of this idle people and new needs. Only in the environment of the new villages and cities could allow the cooperative and freedom to increase the intellectual capital of humankind. 

But when the settlements grows into cities and become complex states, the communication and administrative documents to reign the state demands a new technology: writing.

Even when the cuneiform writing of sumerians, Egyptian hieroglyphs or Chinese logographs has their own primitive or proto writing predecessor -that reach 30000 BC in certain cases-, it's only in the Bronze Age (2000 BC) when this technology becomes much similar to what we know today. One example is Instructions of Shuruppak which is one of the oldest surviving literature.

If the nomadic life depends on the skill of each the hunters to survey as their oral storytellers to the survey of their collective memories as a tradition, the gregarious civilization use the writing as an increasing memory bank. As agriculture allow accumulation of food, writing allow accumulation of knowledge.

Agriculture and writing deepen the social segregation between labour population and not labour as priest and nobility. Know how to read and write become more and more important to apply to staff positions in the state as tax collector, judges and counselors.

The increment of surplus allow the commerce and this a new way to contact other states and cultures. This relationship between cultures bring not just commercial exchange but also technological, religious, artistic and scientific exchange. 

Beside the value of this historical facts, it's our possibility to get some conclusions about what agriculture and writing means for humankind: cooperation and communication.

This two concepts are intrinsic to human development in the antiquity and today. Any human activity lives in a tension between two opposite impulses: competition and cooperation. We can't support us in just one of them. A society without competition will destroy any meritocratic hierarchy but a society just based on competition will relegate the unlucky or unskilled to poverty as we see today. A society without cooperation can advance his science like today that each field is divided every year in new specialties. But a total cooperation won't never be possible without wiping out competition.

Cooperation and communication comes together ands works in many levels and many ways. It's intuitive that it's hard to cooperate without understanding and it's hard to understand each other without communication. It happens in many ways but it's important to highlight the best of it is the two-ways communication. Not a unilateral communication as we see in media. Some useful and beneficial communication take days like when a scientist read a paper from a research in another country and impact in his own research. And then his research become a reply to the first one. Some take months like a new literature current arrive a country as adopted by the writers there. But there's always an impact, a feedback in a two-way communication. 

Cooperation and communication works together, potentiate each other. We can see the important of them in those two milestones in our history: agriculture and writing, and the consequences of them.